# Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
System Patch Management Process
1. Purpose
This SOP outlines the process for identifying, testing, and deploying security patches on company systems to ensure compliance and minimize vulnerabilities.
2. Scope
This procedure applies to all IT-managed systems, including Windows, Linux, and network devices. It covers patch identification, testing, approval, deployment, and verification.
3. Roles and Responsibilities
Role	Responsibility
System Administrator	Identifies and applies patches to assigned systems
Security Analyst	Assesses patch risk and urgency
IT Manager	Approves patches before deployment
Help Desk Team	Assists users with post-patch issues
4. Procedure
Step 1: Patch Identification
1.	Subscribe to vendor security bulletins (Microsoft, Linux distros, firewall vendors).
2.	Use automated tools (e.g., WSUS, SCCM, or Nessus) to detect missing patches.
3.	Document critical patches in the Patch Tracking Sheet.
Step 2: Risk Assessment & Approval
1.	Security Analyst reviews patches for potential conflicts or vulnerabilities.
2.	Assign risk level:
o	Critical – Immediate patch required
o	High – Patch within 7 days
o	Medium – Patch within 30 days
o	Low – Patch during next scheduled maintenance
3.	IT Manager reviews and approves patches for deployment.
Step 3: Patch Testing
1.	Apply patches to a test environment first.
2.	Verify system stability, application compatibility, and network performance.
3.	Document any issues or failures before full deployment.
Step 4: Deployment
1.	Schedule patch deployment during off-peak hours.
2.	Use deployment tools (SCCM, Ansible, or manual update) based on the system type.
3.	Notify users 24-48 hours in advance about any potential downtime.
Step 5: Post-Deployment Verification
1.	Confirm patch installation via:
o	Windows: wmic qfe list or Get-HotFix (PowerShell)
o	Linux: yum list updates --installed or dpkg -l | grep security
2.	Monitor system logs for errors or unexpected behavior.
3.	Help Desk team assists users with post-update issues.
5. Compliance & Documentation
•	Maintain records of all patches in the Patch Tracking Sheet.
•	Conduct quarterly patch audits for compliance.
6. Revision History
Date	Change Description	Author
2025-02-05	Initial SOP creation	Jace Andersen

